---
layout: post
title:  "A Complete Guide to CSS Layout in 2017 - 203: Grid"
date:   2017-09-09 09:10:08 -0700
categories: css front-end layout
type: article
front-page: true
permalink: blog/css-layout-3
---

## What the heck is Grid?

<!-- * CSS Grid Layout is the newest and hottest layout tool in CSS. -->
<!-- * Its used to control how items are laid out over two demensions (where as flexbox only lets you control one). -->
  <!-- * Grid allows you to control columns and rows, not one or the other as flexbox does. -->
  <!-- * However, Grid is designed in a way that if you have a single row or column, it behaves much like flexbox. -->
  <!-- * Infact, many of the properties used to control Grid are similar to those in flexbox. -->
<!-- * Supported in all Major Browsers as of March 2017. Checkout [CanIUse](http://caniuse.com/#feat=css-grid)
* Grid is another step forward in creating complex layouts that can be made responsive rather easily.
* One advantage to Grid is that you can write semantic and soundly structured HTML, and then lay it out visually using CSS, giving you the best of both worlds.
* Grid basically took the idea of the HTML table layouts, but makes it work without using hacks.

* Grid is, essentially, the layout system that is designed to be a *full* layout tool. I've not yet used it to create a full layout system, but I'm certainly using it on much larger sections in a webpage. -->

<!-- *Firefox nightly*! -->

---
Contents:
1:
## :
  1. Terminology and Basic Concepts
  2. Defining a Grid (display, grid-template-*)
  3. : 'fr'
  4. : grid-auto-columns & grid-auto-rows
  5. : grid-gap
  6. repeat()
  7. minmax()
  8.  auto-fill vs auto-fit
  9. grid-template-areas

## : Placing Items
  10. grid-item placement w/ grid-column and grid-row
    11. and grid-column-start, grid column end
  12. 'span'
  13.  named grid lines
  14. `grid-area`,
  : auto-placement (maybe should come after we explort explicit placement)
    - placement algo
    - you can explicitly place some items, then the rest will be placed around it.
    : grid-auto-flow
  : layering-items with z-index
  : order (same as flexbox)

## Alignment
: Alignment:
: justify-items
: align-items
: justify-content / align-content
: align0-self / justify-self

---
# 1: Terminology and Basic Concepts:

There a fair bit of terminology that needs to be understood. They're terms easy, but important.

Grid Container - The container is the parent element. It could be a <code>div</code> or perhaps a <code>section</code>. This is the element on which the <code>display: grid<code> property is applied. All of a containers immeditate children are grid items.

```html
<dix class='grid-container'>
  <div></div>
  <div></div>
  <div></div>
</div>
```

Grid Item - All immediate children of a 'grid container' are 'grid items' that are being manipulated by the Grid.

```html
<dix class='grid-container'>
  <div class='grid-item'></div>
  <div class='grid-item'></div>
  <div class='grid-item'></div>
</div>
```

Gird Line
Grid lines are the lines that make up a grid. The run vertical and horizontal <em>between</em> the grid items. They are referred to by number in the grid system. These lines are <strong>important</strong>, because we place grid-items by which lines they start and end at, not which track they're on.

Grid Track
Grid tracks are the spaces between the lines. The tracks are where our actual content lives. These can also be horizontal or vertical. They're basically columns and rows in your grid.

Grid Cell
This is a single space in the grid, between two horizontal lines and and two vertical lines. A cell is one space.

Grid Area
An area is like a cell, but can span multiple columns and rows. It can take up as many cells as you'd like.

Grid Gutters / Gaps
<code>grid-gap</code> is an actual property, but it defines what I like to think of as 'gutters'. Gutters are spaces between cells. In a less abstract explanation, it literally puts space between your grid items.

---
# Defining a Grid

Defining a grid is just like defining a flexbox. <code>display: grid</code> defines the grid container. Unlike flexbox, we have to do a bit more to make it act like a grid.

The two other properties that all grids should have are <code>grid-template-columns</code> and <code>grid-template-rows</code>. These properties allow us to set the number and size of your columns and rows.

The CSS for this is quite simple:

.flex-container {
  display: flex | inline-flex;
  grid-template-columns: 100px 50px 100px;
  grid-template-rows: 100px 100px;
}

In this example, I defined 3 columns that are 100px each. You can think of this as your grid. The values represent a column track width. The space inbetween (and around) represents a grid line. (And the same goes for rows). With this grid definition, you'll end up with a grid that has 4 vertical lines and 3 horizontal lines.

http://res.cloudinary.com/ericwindmill/image/upload/c_scale,w_500/v1506284099/css-layout/Define_a_Grid.png

<code>grid-template-columns</code> and <code>grid-template-rows</code> take any units that any size property in CSS could take.

Absolute:
<code>px</code>, <code>in</code>, <code>pt</code>, etc
Relative:
<code>percentage</code>
<code>vh</code> / <code>vw</code>
etc...

In this Codepen below, you can input whichever values you want for <code>grid-template-columns</code> and <code>grid-template-rows</code>. See how easy it is to set explicit grid track sizes.

QqGrpb

There's also a unit that's been introduced specifically for grid called the <code>fr</code>. We'll take a look at that next...

---
# The fr unit

<code>fr</code> is a new unit that refers to a <em>fraction</em> of the space left over. It's sometimes called the 'flex' unit, becuase it very much requires the same thinking as flexbox. The question to answer with <code>fr</code> is, "How much space should each column/row take up, even though I don't know how much total space there is?"

<code>fr</code> is used to set the sizes of columns and rows using <code>grid-template-columns</code> and <code>grid-template-rows</code>.

A simplest way to use <code>fr</code> unit:

.container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: 1fr 1fr 1fr;
  /* This is the same as 33% 33% 33%; */
}

A slightly more complex example:
.grid-container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-rows: 1fr 2fr 1fr;
  /* This is the same as 25% 50% 25%;
}

This is fine, but at this point they're just slightly better than percentages, because they remove basic math.

The question again, is "How much of </strong>the remaining</strong> space should each column/row take up, even though I don't know how much total space there is?"

Remaining is the key:

A slightly more complex example:
.grid-container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-rows: 250px 2fr 1fr;
}

In this example, we've given the first column 250pixels, and then taken the <em>remaining</em> space and split it two-thirds to column two and one-third to column three. That is the power of the <code>fr</code>.

The true power of the <code>fr</code> unit is that it can mix with other units with no problem:
JrbBrR

---
# Grid Auto Columns / Rows

Grid is smart, and you don't actually have to define the exact rows and columns that make up a grid.

.grid-container {
  display: grid;
}

.item-one {
  grid-row: 1 / 2;
}

.item-two {
  grid-column: 2 / 3;
}

This simple code would place <code>item-one</code> in the first column, and <code>item-two</code> in the second, even though we havn't defined the columns on the container.

Grid implicitly establishes <code>grid-template-columns: auto auto;</code> on the container. This is great if we don't know exactly how many item's will be in the grid, and how many columns it will need. But suppose we don't know the number of items <em>or</em> the size of those items.

Not a problem:

.grid-container {
  display: grid;
  grid-auto-column: 200px;
}

With this set up, you can dynamically add grid items, and ensure that no matter their size, they're allotted 200px. And, <code>grid-auto-columns</code> plays nice with explicitly definied grids.

.grid-container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: 2fr 2fr;
  grid-auto-columns: 1fr;
}

Now, any dynamically added columns will take up half the space as the explicit columns.

<code>grid-auto-rows</code> works the same way.

RLKpwy

API

.grid-container {
  display: flex;
  grid-auto-rows: auto | 100px | 10% | 2fr;
  grid-auto-columns: auto | 100px | 10% | 2fr;
}

---
# Grid Gap

Grid gap allows you to place a gutter between all of your grid items.

This simple example places 10px of space <em>between</em> each item (it doesn't add space 'around' the total grid items).

API
.grid-container {
  display: flex;
  grid-gap: 10px;
}

In this codepen, you can update the grid-gap value to see how it works. I've set <code>grid-template-columns</code> to <code>fr</code> units because this will force the grid-items to stay within the width of grid, so long as the lenght of the border-box + the length of the gaps isn't longer than the width of the container.

VMPpQB

Here's the same example but <code>grid-template-columns</code> is given px values. This should show you that <code>fr</cope> + <code>grid-gap</code> is a real win.

You can maniputlate horizonal and vertical lines speerately with <code>grid-row-gap</code> and <code>grid-column-gap</code>, respectively.

---
# repeat()

You can save yourself time with the CSS <code>repeat()</code> function. It's used to establish multiple rows or columns with <code>grid-template-columns</code> and <code>grid-template-rows</code>.

The function takes two arguments.
  1. The number of times the column or row should be repeated.
  2. The size of the column or row.

.grid-container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: repeat(3, 1fr);
  /* defines 3 columns that have a width of 1fr */
}

<code>repeat()</code> plays nicely with any amount of customization you'd like. As long as you use it to repeate a recurring pattern, you can establish as many columns inside the function as you'd like.

This is perfectly valid:

.grid-container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: repeat(2, 100px 1fr) 100px;
}

eGgRYx


---
# minmax()

<code>minmax()</code> is a CSS function that sets a minimum and maximum width for a column or row. This is another aspect of grid that allows us to think about it similarly to Flexbox.

<code>minmax()</code> simply takes two arguments, the minimum size a column/row can be, and the maximum size. <code>minmax()</code> works anywhere you can establish a row/column size--inside <code>repeat()</code>, at any point in <code>grid-template-columns</code> and <code>grid-template-rows</code>, etc. That means that you can use it to modify just one column, or many.

This is very handy if you want to, for example, have a sidebar that changes size to deal with different screen sizes, but a main content area that should always be 600px.

.grid-container {
  display: flex;
  grid-template-columns: minmax(100px, 300px) 1fr;
}

Here's a codepen that I used earlier, but I encourage you to change the properties using minmax(), and then adjust the screen size.

wrgqKN

---
# auto-fill vs auto-fit

It'd be nice if we could tell the browser to fit as many columns as will fit into the viewport. We can do that easily with <code>auto-fill</code> in the <code>repeat</code> function.

.grid-container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: repeat(auto-fill, 100px;)
}

Resize the screen below to see the <code>grid-container</code> distribute as many columns as there is space for.

GMrvWw

This is great, as it makes our grids highly flexible. But, you can see that now our items aren't flexible. If you simply set the size value in <code>repeat()</code> to 1fr, you'll 'break' your grid. When you're using auto-fill, grid knows that theres unlimited rows, so each row would just be one long item.

You can solve this by mixing in <code>minmax()</code>

.grid-container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: repeat(auto-fill, minmax(100px, 1fr));
}

This will tell grid to lay out each item at 100px, and then after each is laid out, distribute the rest of the space among each item.

yzgojJ

If you stretch the screen out far enough, and you'll see that there's quite a bit of extra space forming. This is because <code>auto-fill</code> tells grid to create as many columns as it can of this size.

In this Codepen, <code>auto-fill</code> is replaced with <code>auto-fit</code>, which tells grid to collapse all the extra columns it creates, and allow the columns with content to take up all available space.

XepaPa

---
# grid-template-areas
 -- Names Lines

Defining grids isn't all about numbers and math. You can name lines and tracks in your grid and refer to them when placing <code>grid-items</code>.

(This is the first time we'll be exploring how to explicitly place grid-items.)

<code>grid-template-areas</code> lets you name every cell in your grid in a visual way:

.grid-container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: 200px 200px 200px;
  grid-template-rows: 200px 200px 200px;
  grid-template-areas:
    "one one two
    . three four
    six . five"
}

.item-one {
  grid-area: one;
}

.item-two {
  grid-area: two;
}

.item-three {
  grid-area: three;
}

That gives us this:

zENEMy

This is the power of grid! We have an explicityly placed grid, completely with empty cells, and items spaning multiple cells. Nice!

In <code>grid-template-area</code>, any string refers to a named grid cell. The same string repeated means that the grid-item will span multiple cells (see 'one' in the example), and a '.' means the space should be left empty.

Let's refer to the very first example that I had in the Grid section, the simple 'blog-style' webpage. Now let's re-write the same page with <code>grid-template-area</code>.

.container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: 200px 200px 200px;
  grid-template-rows: 200px 200px 200px;
  grid-template-areas:
    "header header"
    "nav nav"
    "aside content";
}

header {
  grid-area: header;
}

nav {
  grid-area: nav;
}

aside {
  grid-area: aside;
}

main {
  grid-area: content;
}

It looks exactly the same:
VMPMNL

This isn't really less code, but it is easier on your brain. Most importantly, it's a nice visual way to layout an entire webpage fairly simply.


---
# Placing Items with Grid-Row and Grid-Column

Placing <code>grid-items</code> on the grid is <em>line-based</em>, rather than track based. You place an item by informing grid at which column or row line to start the item and at which to end the item. There are four properties used to place items:

* grid-column-start
* grid-column-end
* grid-row-start
* grid-row-end

Each of these properties takes the number of a line. To place a grid item in the top left cell:

.grid-item {
  grid-column-start: 1;
  grid-column-end: 2;
  grid-row-start: 1;
  grid-row-end: 2;
}

In this example, I'm explicitly placing items, rather than letting Grid fill them in. This gives me complete control over item placement.

Change the column start/end of item 3 to see how easy it is.

MEpgVr

---
# grid row and grid-column

Grid provides a number of shorthands to make the code less verbose:

* <code>grid-row</code>
* <code>grid-column</code>

.grid-item {
  /* <grid-row-start> and <grid-row-end> */
  grid-row: 1 / 2;

  /* <grid-column-start> and <grid-column-end> */
  grid-column: 2 / 4;
}
---
# Span
The span keyword lets you place grid items by specifying how many rows or columns it they should take, rather than explicitly knowing where they should end.

.grid-item {
  grid-row: 1 / span 3;
  /* same as 1 / 4 */
}

---
# Named Grid Lines
Grid gives you the ability to name lines rather than choosing them by number. You name lines by placing their name inside brackets when establishing <code>grid-template-rows</code> and <code>grid-template-rows</code>. In between every track that you establish, you place the desired line-name.

.grid-container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: [line-1] 1fr [line-2] 1fr [line-3];
}

You can also use named lines in <code>repeat()</code>.

.grid-container {
  display:grid;
  grid-template-columns: repeat(2, [little-tracks] 100px) repeat(2, [lg-tracks] 200px) [grid-end];
  /* same as: [small-tracks] 100px [small-tracks] 100px [lg-tracks] 200px [lg-tracks] 200px  [grid-end];
}

If you name lines like that, you can then access them by giving the tracks a number:
.grid-item {
  display: grid;
  grid-column: small-tracks 2 / grid-end;
  /* small-tracks w/o a number would use the first line named small-tracks */
}

---
# grid-area

We've briefly seen <code>grid-area</code> once before when naming grid-areas. The <code>grid-area</code> property is more flexible than that. It's the only grid-item property you <em>need</em> to know.

.grid-item {
  /* Pass it a named area */
  grid-area: header;

  /* Pass it grid-lines: (place in top-left corner) */
  /* <grid-row-start> <grid-column-start> <grid-row-end> <grid-column-end> */
  grid-area: 1 / 1 / 2 / 2;

  /* Mix named-areas with */
  /* This places the item in rows 1 - 3, in a column named 'main-col' */
  grid-area: 1 / main-col / 3;

  /* Using span() in grid-area */
  /* This places the item between row lines 1 - 4 and column lines 1 and 2*/
  grid-area: 1 / 1 / span 3 / 2;

  /* With named Grid-lines*/
  grid-area: 1 / first-col / 2 / third-col;
}

As you can see, there are a ton of options. You can get to 95% proficency by simply remembering that you can use <code>grid-area</code> with named areas or as a short hand for the four placement properties.

---
# Aside: Grid Auto Placement

In the beginning we established a grid but didn't explicitly place any items, like this:

QqGmRe

This works because of Grid's <a href=''>placement algorithm</a>. The placement algorithm places grid items that haven't been explicitly placed in the next available cell. So, in the above Codepen, each item is simply placed, in the order they're created in the DOM, in the consecutive spaces.

In this example, I'm explicitly placing Item One:

BwWydM

In this exmaple, the grid-algo takes these steams:

1. Paint the grid lines.
2. Paint the grid-items that have been explicitly places (item one, in this case).
3. Paint the grid-items, in order, in the next available cells. (two - six, in this case).

---
# Grid Auto Flow
The <code>grid-auto-flow</code> property dictates how the grid algorithm places items that haven't been explicitly placed. It takes four properties:

* row
  * This is the default. It tells the algorithm to fill in the rows first, and create new rows as needed.
* column
  * Fill in the grid top to bottom, and create new columns as needed.
* row dense
  * This works just like row, but the algorithm will attempt to fill earlier cells with each new grid-item.
* column dense
  * The same, but by column.

<code>row</code> and <code>column</code> are probably used more often, but the <code>dense</code> properties are really cool.

gGmbQE

In the example above we have a four by four grid, with elements that have varying sizes. By default, the <code>grid-auto-flow</code> is set to <code>row</code>. Here's how the algorithm decides where each element lives:


1. The first three items are explicitly placed:
  * One starts at row and column 1, and spans 3
  * Two starts at row 1 and column 3, and spans 3 rows.
  * Three starts at 'auto' for row, so the next row in which it'll fit (row 4), and it spans 3 columns.
2. Next, we come to four and five, which aren't placed, so they goes in the <em>next available spaces</em>.
  * The next available space for four is just to the right of three.
  * Now, because <code>gric-auto-flow</code> is row, and the grid algo needs to make more space, it creates row 5 and places item five at the beginning of that.
3. Now, we have 6, which is set to span 3 rows. Because these rows are explicit, the the three rows collapse to  the size of the content, so it's only slightly 'taller' than five.
4. Finally, Seven and Eight are placed in the next available spaces in rows, which is to the right of six.

In the next Codepen, you can change the <code>grid-auto-flow</code> to <code>row-dense</code>, and see it's power.

Basically, at each new element that Grid tries to place, it will start looking at the beginning.

---
# Layering items with z-index

When explicitly placeing grid items, you can place multiple items in the same cells, and then use z-index to layer them.

vexOgw

----
# Ordering items with Order

Ordering is the last way to manipulate grid's placement algorithm. Grid supports the <code>order</code> property introduced for Flexbox.

By assigning an <code>order</code> to a grid-item, it dictates the order in which the algorithm will pain the item into the grid.

.flex-item-four {
  order: 1;
}

<code>order</code> uses a relative system, and the default order for all grid items is 0. So, by setting <code>order</code> to 1 for a single item, we are actually placing it <em>last</em>.

Let's look at a previous Codepen.

gGmbQE

By simply setting <code>order</code> to 1 on flex-item four, the item is now placed last.

This is most often used with media queries to change the order based on device type, in case you wanted a different basic layout for mobile and desktop.

As with flexbox, it's important to keep in mind that order does not change the order the elements are painted on the DOM.

----
# justify-items
Alignment in Grid is similar to Flexbox, and infact uses the same properties.

<code>justify-items</code> is used to align the content inside the indiviudal item along the row-axis. This property takes four values:

* <code>start</code>: aligns the content to the left end of the grid area.
* <code>end</code>: aligns the content tothe right end of the grid area.
* <code>center</code>: aligns the content horizontally in the grid area.
* <code>stretch</code>: fills the whole width (this is the default)

jGBPjY

----
# align-tems
<code>align-items</code> aligns the content inside each item along the column-axis. This property takes the same four values as justify-items.

* <code>start</code>: aligns the content to the top end of the grid area.
* <code>end</code>: aligns the content tothe bottom end of the grid area.
* <code>center</code>: aligns the content vertically in the grid area.
* <code>stretch</code>: fills the whole height (this is the default)

WZpQwd

----
# justify-content and align-content
<code>justify-content</code> and <code>align-content</code> allow you to manipulate how the entire grid is aligned inside it's container. This is only usable when you have set all the items in your grid are sized with fixed units like <code>px</code>.

<code>justify-content</code> aligns your grid along the row axis, and <code>align-content</code> aligns your content along the column axis.

These two properties take the same 7 values, and they're similar to their respective properties in Flexbox.

* start - aligns the grid to the left end of the grid container
* end - aligns the grid to the right end of the grid container
* center - aligns the grid in the center of the grid container
* stretch - resizes the grid items to allow the grid to fill the full width of the grid container
* space-around - take the remaining space in the container and place an even amount between each grid-item, and half-sizes on the far ends.
* space-between - take the remaining space in the container and place an even amount between each grid-item, with no space around the far ends.
* space-evenly - take the remaining space in the container and place an even amount between each grid-item, including at the far ends.

In this exmaple, I've made the width explicitly <code>600px</code>, but made the total width of the columns less than 600px.

LzWpLp

<code>align-content</code> works the same, but would require an explicit height on the container, and rows that don't add up to that height.
---
# justify-self
# align-self

<code>justify-self</code> and <code>align-self</code> are properties that are placed grid-items themselves to position the content withing the grid-area individually.

In this example, you can toggle the justification of 'grid-item-four'. Justify-self aligns the  content of grid-items along the row axis.

MEpaLd

Align-self works exactly the same way, but along the column-axis.